CHAPTER XXIV.
And Abraham was old and well stricken in age, and the LORD had blessed Abraham in all things.
And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had,
Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and I will make thee swear by the LORD, the
God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of
the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell, but thou shalt go unto my country,
and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.
And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me
unto this land, must I need to bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest.
And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.
The LORD God of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and from the land of my
kindred, and which spake unto me, and that swear unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will
I give this land, he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto
my son from thence.
And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my
oath, only bring not my son thither again.
And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sweared to him
concerning that matter.
And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed, for all the goods
of his master were in his hand, and he arose and went to Mesopotamia unto the city of Nahor.
And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of
the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water.
And he said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day,
and show kindness unto my master Abraham.
Behold I stand here by the well of water, and the daughters of the men of the city come
out to draw water.
And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I
pray thee, that I may drink.
And she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also.
Let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac, and thereby shall
I know that thou hast showed kindness unto my master.
And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that behold Rebecca came out, who was born
of Milka, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her.
And she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.
And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water
of thy pitcher.
And she said, Drink, my lord.
And she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.
And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also,
until they have done drinking.
And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to
draw water, and drew for all his camels.
And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the lord had made his journey
prosperous or not.
And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring
of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold,
and said, Whose daughter art thou?
Tell me, I pray thee, is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?
And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Milka, which she bear
unto Nahor.
She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.
And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the lord.
And he said, Blessed be the lord God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute
my master of his mercy and his truth, I being in the way, the lord led me to the house of
my master's brethren.
And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these things.
And Rebecca had a brother, and his name was Laban, and Laban ran out unto the man, unto
the well.
And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister's hands, and
he heard the words of Rebecca his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me, that he
came unto the man, and behold he stood by the camels at the well.
And he said, Come in thou blessed of the lord, wherefore standest thou without?
For I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.
And the man came into the house, and he unguarded his camels, and gave straw and provender for
the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men's feet that were with him.
And there was set meat before him to eat, but he said, I will not eat until I have told
mine errand.
And he said, Speak on.
And he said, I am Abraham's servant, and the lord hath blessed my master greatly, and he
is become great, and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and men's
servants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.
And Sarah, my master's wife, bare a son to my master, when she was old, and unto him
hath he given all that he hath.
And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters
of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell, but thou shalt go unto my father's house,
and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son.
And I said unto my master, Peradventure, the woman will not follow me.
And he said unto me, The lord before whom I walk will send his angel with thee, and
prosper thy way, and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's
house.
Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred, and if they
give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.
And I came this day unto the well, and said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, if now thou
do prosper my way which I go, behold, I stand by the well of water, and it shall come to
pass that when the Virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray
thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink, and she say to me, Both drink thou, and I
will also draw for thy camels, let the same be the woman whom the Lord hath appointed
out for my master's son.
And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebecca came forth with her pitcher
on her shoulder, and she went down unto the well, and drew water, and I said unto her,
Let me drink, I pray thee, and she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder,
and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also.
So I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou?
And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milka bear unto him, and I put the
earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.
And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the Lord, and blessed the Lord God of my master
Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto
his son.
And now, if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me, and if not, tell
me, that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.
Then Laban and Bethuel answered, and said, The thing proceedeth from the Lord, we cannot
speak unto thee bad or good.
Behold Rebecca is before thee, take her and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife,
as the Lord hath spoken.
And it came to pass that when Abraham's servant heard their words, he worshipped the Lord
bowing himself to the earth.
And the servant brought forth jewels of silver and jewels of gold and raiment, and gave them
to Rebecca, and he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.
And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night.
And they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.
And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least
ten, after that she shall go.
And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the Lord hath prospered my way, send me away
that I may go to my master.
And they said, We will call the damsel and inquire at her mouth.
And they called Rebecca, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man?
And she said, I will go.
And they sent away Rebecca, their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and
his men.
And they blessed Rebecca, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the mother of
thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.
And Rebecca arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man,
and the servant took Rebecca, and went his way.
And Isaac came from the way of the well Lehi Roy, for he dwelt in the south country.
And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the even tide, and he lifted up his eyes,
and saw, and behold, the camels were coming.
And Rebecca lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac she lighted off the camel.
For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh in the field to meet
us?
And the servant had said, It is my master, therefore she took a veil and covered herself.
And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.
And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took Rebecca, and she became his
wife, and he loved her, and Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.
Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.
And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshin, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shua.
And Jokshin begat Sheba, and Dedan.
And the sons of Dedan were Ashurim, and Latushim, and Leumim.
And the sons of Midian, Ephah, and Ephur, and Hanak, and Abida, and Eldayah.
All these were the children of Keturah.
And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.
But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent
them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.
And these were the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, and a hundred threescore,
and fifteen years.
Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years,
and was gathered to his people.
And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of
Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre, the field which Abraham purchased
unto the sons of Heth.
There was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.
And it came to pass, after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac, and Isaac
dwelt by the well Lehi Roy.
Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's
handmaid, bare unto Abraham.
And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations,
the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebejeth, and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsum, and Mishma, and Duma,
and Massa, Hader, and Tima, Jeter, Nefesh, and Kedema.
These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their
castles, twelve princes according to their nations.
And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, and a hundred and thirty and seven years,
and he gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people.
And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is, before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria,
and he died in the presence of all his brethren.
And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son.
Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, the daughter
of Bethuel, the Syrian, of Paedon Aram, the sister to Laban, the Syrian.
And Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife, because she was barren, and the Lord was entreated
of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.
And the children struggled together within her, and she said, If it be so, why am I thus?
And she went to inquire of the Lord.
And the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall
be separated from thy bowels, and the one people shall be stronger than the other people,
and the elder shall serve the younger.
And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.
And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment, and they called his name
Esau.
And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau's heel, and his name
was called Jacob, and Isaac was three score years old when she bare them.
And the boys grew, and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field, and Jacob was
a plain man, dwelling in tents.
And Isaac loved Esau because he did eat of his venison, but Rebekah loved Jacob.
And Jacob sawed pottage, and Esau came from the field, and he was faint, and Esau said
to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage, for I am faint. Therefore
his name was called Edom.
And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.
And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die, and what profit shall this birthright
do to me?
And Jacob said, Swear to me this day.
And he swear unto him, and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.
Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentils, and he did eat and drink, and rose
up and went his way. Thus Esau despised his birthright.
CHAPTER XXVI
And there was a famine in the land beside the first famine that was in the days of Abraham,
and Isaac went unto Abimelek, king of the Philistines, unto Gerar. And the Lord appeared
unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt, dwell in the land which I shall tell thee
of. Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee. For unto thee,
and unto thy seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I swear
unto Abraham thy father. And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and
will give unto thy seed all these countries. And in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed, because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments,
my statutes, and my laws.
And Isaac dwelt in Gerar, and the men of the place asked him of his wife, and he said,
She is my sister, for he feared to say, She is my wife, lest, said he, the men of the
place should kill me for Rebekah, because she was fair to look upon. And it came to
he had been there a long time, that Abimelech, king of the Philistines, looked out at a window,
and saw, and behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife. And Abimelech called Isaac,
and said, Behold, of assurity, she is thy wife, and how saidst thou, She is my sister?
And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, lest I die for her. And Abimelech said, What is
this thou hast done unto us? One of the people might lightly have lied with thy wife, and
thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us. And Abimelech charged all his people,
saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to death. Then Isaac sowed
in that land, and received in the same year and hundredfold, and the Lord blessed him.
And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great, for he
had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of servants, and
the Philistines envied him. For all the wells which his father's servants had digged in
the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped them, and filled them with earth.
And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us, for thou art much mightier than we. And Isaac
departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of Girhar, and dwelt there.
And Isaac digged again the wells of water which they had digged in the days of Abraham
his father, for the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham, and he called
their names after the names by which his father had called them. And Isaac's servants digged
in the valley, and found there a well of springing water. And the herdmen of Girhar did strive
with Isaac's herdmen, saying, The water is ours. And he called the name of the well Esek,
because they strove with him. And they digged another well, and strove for that also, and
he called the name of it Sitna. And he removed from thence, and digged another well, and
for that they strove not. And he called the name of it Rehoboth, and he said, For now
the Lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land. And he went up from
thence to Beersheba. And the Lord appeared unto him the same night, and said, I am the
God of Abraham, thy father. Fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply
thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake. And he built an altar there, and called upon the
name of the Lord, and pitched his tent there, and there Isaac's servants digged a well.
Then Abimlek went to him from Girhar, and Ahazeth, one of his friends, and Phicol, the
captain of his army. And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me,
and have sent me away from you? And they said, We saw certainly that the Lord was with thee,
and we said, Let there be now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us
make a covenant with thee, that thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee,
and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace. Thou
art now the blessed of the Lord. And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.
And they rose up at times in the morning, and swear one to another, and Isaac sent them
away, and they departed from him in peace. And it came to pass the same day that Isaac's
servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto
him, We have found water. And he called it Sheba, therefore the name of the city is Beersheba
unto this day. And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of
Berei the Hittite, and Bashameth the daughter of Elan the Hittite, which were a grief of
mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.
CHAPTER XXVII
And it came to pass that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not
he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto him, My son, and he said unto him, Behold,
here am I. And he said, Behold now, I am old, and I know not the day of my death. Now therefore
take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver, and thy bow, and go out to the field, and
take me some venison, and make me savoury meat such as I love, and bring it to me that
I may eat, that my soul may bless thee before I die.
And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son, and Esau went to the field to hunt
for venison, and to bring it.
And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak unto Esau
thy brother, saying, Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat that I may eat, and bless
thee before the Lord before my death. Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according
to that which I command thee. Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids
of the goats, and I will make them savoury meat for thy father such as he loveth, and
thou shalt bring it to thy father that he may eat, and that he may bless thee before
his death.
And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a
smooth man. My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver,
and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.
And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son, only obey my voice, and go
fetch me them.
And he went and fetched and brought them to his mother, and his mother made savoury meat
such as his father loved. And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which
were with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob, her younger son. And she put the skins
of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of his neck, and she gave
the savoury meat and the bread which she had prepared into the hand of her son Jacob.
And he came unto his father and said, My father, and he said, Here am I, who art thou my son?
And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy first born, I have done according as thou
batest me, arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
And Isaac said unto his son, How is it that thou hast found it so quickly, my son? And
he said, Because the Lord thy God brought it to me.
And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether
thou be my very son Esau or not. And Jacob went near unto Isaac his father, and he felt
him, and said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau. And
he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy as his brother Esau's hands, so he
blessed him. And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am. And he said,
Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's venison, that my soul may bless thee.
And he brought it near to him, and he did eat, and he brought him wine, and he drank.
And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss me, my son. And he came near
and kissed him, and he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See,
the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed. Therefore God
give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine.
Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee. Be Lord over thy brethren, and let
thy mother's sons bow down to thee. Cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed
be he that blesseth thee.
And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob was
yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came
in from his hunting. And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father,
and said unto his father, Let my father arise and eat of his son's venison, that thy soul
may bless me. And Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I am thy son,
thy firstborn Esau. And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? Where is he that
hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and
have blessed him? Yea, and he shall be blessed. And when Esau heard the words of his father,
he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, even
me also, O my father. And he said, Thy brother came with subtlety, and hath taken away thy
blessing. And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? For he hath supplanted me these two
times. He took away my birthright, and behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he
said, Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me? And Isaac answered and said unto Esau,
Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for servants,
and with corn and wine have I sustained him. And what shall I do now unto thee, my son?
And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my father? Bless me, even me
also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice and wept. And Isaac his father answered
and said unto him, Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth and of the dew
of heaven from above, and by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother, and
it shall come to pass, when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke
from off thy neck. And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed
him. And Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand. Then
I will slay my brother Jacob. And these words of Esau, her elder son, were told to Rebecca,
and she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy brother
Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to kill thee. Now therefore, my
son, obey my voice, and arise, flee thou to Laban, my brother, to Heron, and tarry with
him a few days, until thy brother's fury turn away, until thy brother's anger turn
away from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him. Then I will send and fetch
thee from thence. Why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?
And Rebecca said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth. If
Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of
land, what good shall my life do me?